The GNU Compiler Collection is part of the GNU Project, launched in 1984
to develop a complete Unix-like operating system which is free software:
the GNU system.  

The Free Software Foundation (FSF) is a tax-exempt charity that raises
funds for continuing work on the GNU Project.  It is dedicated to
promoting the right to use, study, copy, modify, and redistribute
computer programs.  One of the best ways to help the development of free
software is to become an associate member of the Free Software
Foundation, and pay regular dues to support their efforts.  

Associate members of the Free Software Foundation receive many benefits,
including regular newsletters, admission to the FSF annual meeting, and
discounts on books and CDROMs published by GNU Press.  Membership dues
are also tax deductible in the USA.  For more information on becoming a
member, visit the FSF website at @uref{http://www.fsf.org/}.

The Free Software Foundation Europe (FSFE) is a sister organisation of
the Free Software Foundation.  The FSFE is active in promoting free
software at all levels in Europe.  For an annual membership fee,
individuals can join FSFE and support its work.  Members receive a
personalised GPG-compatible membership smartcard, allowing secure
digital authentication of email and files, and gain access to the ``FSFE
Fellowship'', an electronic community for software freedom.  For more
information, visit the FSFE website at @uref{http://www.fsfe.org/}.

The @cite{Foundation for a Free Information Infrastructure (FFII)} is
another important organization in Europe.  FFII is not specific to free
software, but works to defend the rights of all programmers and computer
users against monopolies in the field of computing, such as patents on
software.  For more information about FFII, or to support their work
with a donation, visit their website at @uref{http://www.ffii.org/}.

