@node Foreword
@unnumbered Foreword
@i{This foreword has been kindly contributed by Richard M.@: Stallman, the
principal author of GCC and founder of the GNU Project.}
@vskip 1ex

This book is a guide to getting started with GCC, the GNU Compiler
Collection.  It will tell you how to use GCC as a programming tool.
GCC is a programming tool, that's true---but it is also something
more.  It is part of a 20-year campaign for freedom for computer
users.
 
We all want good software, but what does it mean for software to be
``good''?  Convenient features and reliability are what it means to
be @emph{technically} good, but that is not enough.  Good software
must also be @emph{ethically} good: it has to respect the users'
freedom.

As a user of software, you should have the right to run it as you see
fit, the right to study the source code and then change it as you see
fit, the right to redistribute copies of it to others, and the right
to publish a modified version so that you can contribute to building
the community.  When a program respects your freedom in this way, we
call it @dfn{free software}.  Before GCC, there were other compilers
for C, Fortran, Ada, etc.  But they were not free software; you could
not use them in freedom.  I wrote GCC so we could use a compiler
without giving up our freedom.

A compiler alone is not enough---to use a computer system, you need a
whole operating system.  In 1983, all operating systems for modern
computers were non-free.  To remedy this, in 1984 I began developing
the GNU operating system, a Unix-like system that would be free
software.  Developing GCC was one part of developing GNU.

By the early 90s, the nearly-finished GNU operating system was
completed by the addition of a kernel, Linux, that became free
software in 1992.  The combined GNU/Linux operating system has
achieved the goal of making it possible to use a computer in freedom.
But freedom is never automatically secure, and we need to work to
defend it.  The Free Software Movement needs your support.
@vskip 1ex
@flushright
Richard M.@: Stallman
February 2004
@end flushright
